Hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss about pointer arithmetic.
Let us first learn increment operation on a
pointer
So consider the C code here.
First we have an integer variable declaration for i and initialising
it to 10 and let the memory allocated for i
be from 1024 to 1027
Now we have an integer pointer declaration for ptr and
assigning the address of i which is 1024
Now we are printing the value of ptr which
will print the value stored in ptr which is 1024
Now we are incrementing ptr
Since ptr  is an integer pointer the increment operation
will move by four bytes as the size of int is 4
and will point to 1028. So now ptr will have
the value 1028
Now let us  print value of ptr again and it will
print 1028
So that is about Pointer Increment operation
So it completely depends on the data type of pointer
It will increment by the size of the datatype.
Now let us see decrement operation. Take the same
scenario
Initially ptr holds the value 1024 and similar to increment
operation
if we decrement a pointer it will get
decremented by the size of the data type of pointer
And here it is integer, So it will get
decremented by the size of integer which is 4.
so after the decrement operation it will hold the value
1020. Now if we print ptr we will get 1020 printed.
Now let us discuss about Pointer addition.
So consider the sample C program we are declaring
integer i and initialising to 100, declaring  a pointer ptr
pointing to i so it will store the address of
i which is 1024
now we are printing ptr which will print its
value which is 1024 and next
We print ptr+1
So again as we discussed in increment and  decrement operation
adding 'n' to a pointer will add 'n' times the size
of data type of pointer so adding one will add
one time the size of datatype which is integer
here
So 1*4 equal to 4 bytes will be
added and will print 1028
Next we're printing ptr+3 which will add three times
the size of integer which is 4 to ptr that
is 3*4 equal to  12 + ptr equal to 1036
Simply saying we are not adding three bytes but three
blocks
So we get the output 1036
And now let us discuss about pointer subtraction. Again
The idea is same. Each time we subtract a number
we are actually subtracting that number of blocks and not
that number of bytes
So here we have ptr - 1 and
ptr equal to 1024
So subtract a block of four bytes and why 4  bytes?
Because that is the size of the datatype
of pointer
So subtract 4 from 1024 and we get 1020 and that
will be printed
Next
We have ptr-2 which will subtract
2*4 equal to 8 bytes from 1024 and
we get 1016 printed
So these are some basic arithemtic operations on pointers
Now all these cases we had an integer type
Now what if it was of character type? since  size
of character is one byte, in increment operation
It will get incremented by one byte.
If it was float than it would get incremented by
four bytes
As 4 is the size of float and if it was double
it would get incremented by eight bytes since the
size of double is eight
And some limitations are, we cannot perform multiplication, division and
bitwise operations on pointers
So that's all and thank you for watching this video